# Atoma Vision

Atoma Network is a next generation permissionless decentralized protocol specialized for heavy verifiable compute. Atoma Network derives its features from compute providers, referred to as execution nodes (or simply nodes). Nodes on the Atoma Network are responsible for processing different types of compute requests.


## AI Inference

Atoma is designed to process AI inference requests as well as other types of general compute requests. 

AI inference requests often are processed through nodes that run Large Language models (LLMs) on (often) text inputs to generate either text responses or images (for multi-modality capabilities). More standard and traditional models for time series predictions, recommendation systems, etc. are also compatible. 

Notice that AI inference often requires access to powerful GPUs (like NVIDIA RTX4090, A100, etc). Contrary to CPUs (which TEEs are currently broadly available), only the higher caliber GPUs (like NVIDIA H100, which costs up to $30,000 and are very difficult to acquire) have TEE natively. 

Deploying CPU and GPU communication in a TEE setup is highly non-trivial. For this reason, we can't expect Atoma nodes to provide verifiable execution through TEEs. Instead, we have designed and developed a sampling consensus protocol to validate the state of each request's output generation. 

Roughly speaking, each request submitted into the Atoma Network randomly assigns a given number of nodes to execute the request (10 nodes usually provide very high security guarantees). The cost of running each request corresponds to the native cost of running through a single node times the number of selected nodes plus a given reward margin. Atoma Network also handles dispute mechanisms in case the sampled nodes to execute an inference do not agree on the state of the output. 

Together with reputation and slashing mechanisms, nodes on the Atoma Network have no incentive to act maliciously, provided these are generally rational in an economic environment.


## AWS Lambda Functionality

Atoma nodes can run arbitrary WASM applications and operate similarly to AWS lambda but in a decentralized and permissionless setting. These requests are efficiently handled by nodes with high availability, which leads to greater levels of coordination. 

Having multiple nodes available to run requests in a decentralized setting leads to better request pricing compared to current centralized cloud solutions which often charge high margins for their services. 

In order to ensure security for the end-user (who submits the requests in the first place) and to the actual node, we require WASM applications to run inside a trusted execution environment (TEE). This means that WASM applications can't have access to read/write disk operations.

TEEs provide attestations which offer sufficient evidence of the integrity of the output generated by such nodes executing requests through a given WASM application. Moreover, TEEs provide full input and output privacy to the end user (nodes cannot have read access to both inputs and outputs, unless the node has capacity to physically change the inner circuits of its CPU).


## Smart Contract Enhancement 

Atoma's nodes can provide higher levels of functionality to smart contracts on any blockchain through verifiability. Smart contracts can delegate heavy computations to Atoma nodes in the form of requests. Atoma nodes execute in a coordinated way, providing high assurance guarantees that computations were not tampered with.  

Smart contracts can offload AI computations, or other types of logic executions to Atoma. Atoma allows for the next generation of Web3 applications to build on top of its infrastructure, which includes AI content generation, AI predictions, protein folding, WASM smart contracts on any blockchain, and more. 

Smart contracts can become both truly smart (and intelligent) and can be enhanced through a decentralized AWS lambda infrastructure (similar to a wide range of existing of Web2 applications). 

## A General Compute Infrastructure Layer

The Atoma Network sits between being a DePin and a decentralized marketplace for compute. Atoma Network aggregates decentralized compute in the form of a permissionless set of nodes, holding different types of hardware, similar to a DePin network. 

They differ where DePins are usually responsible for aggregating compute resources and managing payments for resource utilization whereas nodes on the Atoma Network are responsible to subscribe to very specific compute tasks. 

These tasks can be running AI compute on a given specific model (that the model specifies upon registering on the Atoma Network protocol), or running a protein folding algorithm inside a TEE. Once a node subscribes to a given compute task, it cannot provide compute to different tasks (that it didn't subscribe to). 

Atoma nodes provide the supply side of a market place, and requests to the Atoma Network represent the demand side of the network. Nodes on the Atoma Network are subject to deposit collateral to participate on the network. Moreover, the Atoma Network protocol puts forth both reputation and slashing mechanisms to make sure that nodes execute the compute tasks (they have subscribed to) in the most performant and trusted possible way. 

The Atoma Network's open-source software equips nodes with the tools and infrastructure needed to perform computing tasks efficiently. This means that nodes only need to clone the Atoma's node infrastructure open source repository, build the binaries, and execute them. The Atoma Network binaries allow nodes to listen to blockchain events and execute requests.

They automatically provide all the necessary infrastructure, including downloading AI model weights and WASM binaries from external APIs. Therefore, aside from hardware and electricity costs, node operators have minimal work, mainly monitoring and handling potential shutdowns like power outages.

## AI alignment 

Recently, there have been extensive debates about AI alignment and potential arms race regarding next generation AGI capabilities, by companies and governments over the world. Such eventual arms race will tend to further centralize technology at the hands of a few, while
further reducing data ownership and privacy from users and customers. Through Atoma, we plan to create an alternative to this
potential dystopian future. We are putting forth serious efforts to bring full privacy to the Atoma Network, through TEEs and suitable
cryptographic schemes, while facilitating both a data and intelligence economies, through a few solid partnerships with other builders
in the space. Through the Atoma token, users publishing new models onto the Atoma Network can generate a continuous stream of revenue
to compensate for the tremendous effort of training very large AI models. Moreover, through tokenomics it is possible to align multiple users with common interests and needs to incentivize data and compute owners to share their valuable resource for training new AI models.
Moreover, users have a word to say in how they want AI to accommodate for their necessities (instead of the way around).


## Realizing the Next Generation Applications

Compute requirements will grow exponentially in the coming years, especially due to the emergence of powerful generative AIs. It is estimated that decentralized cloud/edge infrastructure is expected to grow substantially by 2027 meaning it is likely that there will be substantial intersections between demand for compute, AI, and decentralized infrastructure.

Atoma is well positioned to lead the space and open the doors for the next generation of decentralized applications. We believe Atoma will provide the infrastructure for the following applications to materialize:

1. User data privacy oriented applications. Through the use of TEEs for AI inference, we can provide a cheap infrastructure layer for
private AI compute. Assuming that user data is private at rest (is stored encrypted), it is possible for Atoma Nodes to decrypt the data within a TEE, thus the node has no access to sensitive information. Once the output is generated, both the input data and the generated output can be encrypted again and transmitted to the user, who can then decrypt them.

2. From 1., decentralized protocols can be built that interact with user owned vector embedding databases, which can be thought of as the user's digital footprint, while maintaining full privacy and data ownership. Further applications can be created using these features such as interactive browsers that can have fine access to user preferences without ever sharing sensitive user data with the exterior world.

3. DeFi automation strategies. Current DeFi protocols rely on heavy manual set up of key parameters, e.g. token emission rates. These values can be tuned through AI given the current market conditions. Atoma enables this in a completely transparent way reducing any trust assumption on the DeFi protocol core team.

4. Generative AI content for Web3 applications. These include genetic NFTs that can adapt their features (through AI) on the users own blockchain activity or other personal/public available data.

5. Autonomous smart agents that can interact with blockchains and protocols. In order to build smart agents behaving on behalf of Web3 protocols, it is necessary that these are automated and controlled in a transparent decentralized environment. This is only possible through a decentralized AI inference protocol such as the Atoma Network.

